ACT_ID: bns
ACT: Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita
YEAR: 2023
TYPE: criminal
SOURCE_URL: https://www.indiacode.nic.in/handle/123456789/20062
RETRIEVAL_DATE: 2026-06-28
===
Section 2. Definitions.
In this Sanhita, unless the context otherwise requires, "act" denotes as well a
series of acts as a single act; "dishonestly" means doing anything with the
intention of causing wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss to another
person.

Section 103. Punishment for murder.
(1) Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or imprisonment for
life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) When a group of five or more persons acting in concert commits murder on the
ground of race, caste or community, sex, place of birth, language, personal
belief or any other similar ground, each member of such group shall be punished
with death or with imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 115. Voluntarily causing hurt.
(1) Whoever does any act with the intention of thereby causing hurt to any
person, or with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any
person, and does thereby cause hurt to any person, is said voluntarily to cause
hurt.
(2) Whoever, except in the case provided for by sub-section (1) of section 122,
voluntarily causes hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 303. Theft.
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the
possession of any person without that person's consent, moves that property in
order to such taking, is said to commit theft.

Section 318. Cheating.
(1) Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the
person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any
person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so
deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were
not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage
or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to cheat.
(2) Whoever cheats shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
(3) Whoever cheats with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause
wrongful loss to a person whose interest in the transaction he was bound to
protect shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
(4) Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to
deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or
any part of a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable
to fine.
