ACT_ID: bnss
ACT: Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita
YEAR: 2023
TYPE: criminal
SOURCE_URL: https://www.indiacode.nic.in/handle/123456789/20063
RETRIEVAL_DATE: 2026-06-28
===
Section 35. When police may arrest without warrant.
(1) Any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a
warrant, arrest any person who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a
cognizable offence, or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or
credible information has been received that he has committed a cognizable
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years.
(2) No person concerned in a cognizable offence punishable for a term less than
three years and who is infirm or is above sixty years of age shall be arrested
without the prior permission of an officer not below the rank of Deputy
Superintendent of Police.

Section 47. Person arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of right to
bail.
(1) Every police officer or other person arresting any person without warrant
shall forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the offence for which he
is arrested or other grounds for such arrest.
(2) Where a police officer arrests without warrant any person other than a
person accused of a non-bailable offence, he shall inform the person arrested
that he is entitled to be released on bail and that he may arrange for sureties
on his behalf.

Section 173. Information in cognizable cases.
Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence,
irrespective of the area where the offence is committed, may be given orally or
by electronic communication to an officer in charge of a police station, and if
given orally, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction.

Section 187. Procedure when investigation cannot be completed in twenty-four
hours.
Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody and it appears that the
investigation cannot be completed within the period of twenty-four hours, the
officer in charge shall forward the accused to the nearest Judicial Magistrate.

Section 196. Inquiry by Magistrate into cause of death.
When any person dies while in the custody of the police, the nearest Magistrate
empowered to hold inquests shall hold an inquiry into the cause of death.
